"Steve's vision for Apple stretched far beyond his time with us. He intended Apple Park to be the home of innovation for generations to come," said Tim Cook, Apple's CEO. "The workspaces and parklands are designed to inspire our team as well as benefit the environment. We've achieved one of the most energy-efficient buildings in the world and the campus will run entirely on renewable energy."
Apple Park will also include a visitors center with an Apple Store and cafe open to the public, a 100,000-square-foot fitness center for Apple employees, secure research and development facilities, and two miles of walking and running paths for employees, plus an orchard, meadow and pond within the ring of the main building.
Our UK readers will also be interested to hear that Apple is building a new HQ in London, at the Battersea Power Station. You can read more about Apple's Battersea development here.
Updated, 17 March 2017, with predictions that Apple Park's opening will coincide with the company's 2017 spring launch event.
Apple has got so big that it's running out of space - so the company is building employees a new HQ building to complement its campus at One Infinite Loop. In this article, we've rounded up 52 fascinating facts about the new Apple Park campus, which is referred to by many as the 'Spaceship Campus' due to its flying-saucer-like design.

Apple has now announced that the campus is nearly finished, and revealed both its name and when employees will begin moving in. The campus is officially called Apple Park, and the first employees will begin occupying the 175-acre campus in April 2017. The company added that it will take more than six months to move 12,000 employees into the new site, and that some construction will continue over the summer even as employees move in.

Apple also announced one of the Park's most important additions: the Steve Jobs Theater. The 1,000-seat auditorium is located on a hill, one of the highest points within the Apple Park, and will no doubt be the site of the company's future product launches - something Apple promised at its 'Let us loop you in' launch event in March 2016 - where it unveiled the iPhone SE and new 9.7in iPad Pro.

"Steve's vision for Apple stretched far beyond his time with us. He intended Apple Park to be the home of innovation for generations to come," said Tim Cook, Apple's CEO. "The workspaces and parklands are designed to inspire our team as well as benefit the environment. We've achieved one of the most energy-efficient buildings in the world and the campus will run entirely on renewable energy."

Apple Park will also include a visitors center with an Apple Store and cafe open to the public, a 100,000-square-foot fitness center for Apple employees, secure research and development facilities, and two miles of walking and running paths for employees, plus an orchard, meadow and pond within the ring of the main building.

Our UK readers will also be interested to hear that Apple is building a new HQ in London, at the Battersea Power Station. You can read more about Apple's Battersea development here.

Updated, 17 March 2017, with predictions that Apple Park's opening will coincide with the company's 2017 spring launch event.

Apple has got so big that it's running out of space - so the company is building a new HQ building to complement its campus at One Infinite Loop. In this article, we've rounded up 52 fascinating facts about the new Apple Park campus, which is referred to by many as the 'Spaceship Campus' due to its flying-saucer-like design.

Apple has now announced that the campus is nearly finished, and revealed both its name and when employees will begin moving in. The campus is officially called Apple Park, and the first employees will begin occupying the 175-acre campus in April 2017. The company added that it will take more than six months to move 12,000 employees into the new site, and that some construction will continue over the summer even as employees move in.

Apple also announced one of the Park's most important additions: the Steve Jobs Theater. The 1,000-seat auditorium is located on a hill, one of the highest points within the Apple Park, and will no doubt be the site of the company's future product launches - something Apple promised at its 'Let us loop you in' launch event in March 2016 - where it unveiled the iPhone SE and new 9.7in iPad Pro.
