It is a brand which has traded on its bad boy reputation.But Jaguar is now showing off its green credentials as the company tests its first ever electric concept car - right in the heart of London.The all-electric sports car has a top speed of 200mph and is part of Jaguar's bid to take on electric car pioneer Elon Musk - whose Tesla vehicles have revolutionised the market Ð and beat him at his own game. Jaguar's new I-PACE concept car was tested for the first time on the streets of the Olympic Park in London. Unlike a previous Jaguar marketing campaign which features British actors Tom Hiddleston, Mark Strong and Sir Ben Kingsley in 'villainous' Jag-driving roles, the new I-PACE aims to do good for the planet.Jaguar says it has 'torn up the rule book' to create a svelte new five-seater that combines 'supercar looks, sports car performance and sports utility space' in a vehicle that can be charged at home from the domestic mains.'It's very special to put the car outside and in the real-world', said Ian Callum, director of design at Jaguar. 'You can see the true value of the I-PACE's dramatic silhouette and powerful proportions when you see it on the road, against other cars. 'The I-PACE Concept represents the next generation of battery electric vehicle design.'It will accelerate from rest to 60mph in just four seconds and boasts a range of around 300 miles Ð enough, says Jaguar, to handle the average commute for a week on a single charge. It can be fully charged in two hours, or achieve 80 per cent of that in 90 minutes. The Jaguar I-PACE will be on the roads in the second half of 2018, the company says.  Described as a 'long distance sprinter', the I-PACE is powered by two electric motors Ð one attached to each axle front and back and together delivering 400 horsepower. equivalent to four Ford Fiestas.Keeping the lithium ion battery pack flat under the floor also frees up lots more interior space in the cabin.Running off electric power only means the new Jaguar has zero emissions of carbon dioxide or other pollutants and is therefore exempt from road tax and congestion charges in London and other towns and cities. Jaguar has already signalled its electric future by entering the Formula-E electric car championships and using the single-seat re-chargeable racing-cars as a test-bed and cheer-leader for its new electric vehicles.The switch to electric is also necessary as Jaguar and other car-makers battle to meet tough new EU emissions targets or risk hefty penalties.By 2020 Jaguar must cut the average carbon dioxide emitted by all the cars it sells by 45 per cent, compared to 2007 or face 'fines' of up to £90 ($110) per car.Even once the UK leaves the EU, Jaguar will have to comply if it wants to sell to mainland Europe.Jaguar Land Rover is also understood to be investigating setting up a battery plant in Britain, possibly in collaboration with other manufacturers. 